Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I’m Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
two of our three-part mini-series on
“power struggles in post-colonial Africa”.
In case you missed it, in part one,
we looked at Mobutu Sese Seko, the
leopard-skin-hat-wearing dictator
who ruled the Democratic Republic of
Congo for more than three decades.
Next up, in part three, we’ll be
looking at the Angolan Model and
the mechanics of how China is
building Angola in exchange for oil.
Today, though, in part two, we are
going to talk about a man called
Simon Mann and a plot to overthrow
the leader of Equatorial Guinea.
It's a story almost too theatrical to
be true, involving mercenaries, the
most prestigious and expensive school
in Britain, the son of a British prime
minister, King Juan Carlos of Spain,
Chelsea mansions, a notorious prison,
oil, offshore bank accounts, grenade
launchers, helicopters and more.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
If I asked you to close your eyes and
picture the protagonists of a military
coup in an oil-rich West African nation, I
imagine certain images might come to mind.
Perhaps a fierce-looking man with a
beret and an AK-47 hanging by his side.
Groups of disgruntled young
soldiers sitting nonchalantly
on 4x4s, smoking cigarettes.
Perhaps even someone like Mobutu
Sese Seko, a tall man with a
leopard-skin cap, large sunglasses,
and an ebony cane by his side.
Perhaps you might not imagine two
English men in their early 50s, one
of whom had gone to Eton College, the
same elite private school as Princes
William and Harry, and the other being
the son of a British Prime Minister.
Yet these were two of the key
figures behind today’s story,
the plot to overthrow the
president of Equatorial Guinea.
The men’s names were Simon
Mann and Mark Thatcher.
Yes, Thatcher as in Margaret Thatcher, the
British Prime Minister from 1979 to 1990.
Let’s start with Simon Mann.
He was born in 1952 into a
world of money and privilege.
His father was a major in the
British Army, and his grandfather
had co-founded an engineering firm
that eventually became part of one
of the UK’s largest brewing empires.
This wasn’t just upper-middle-class
comfort; this was old money,
old connections, the very top
of the British upper class.
This, naturally, led him to Eton College.
Now, as a quick side note, I made an
episode about Eton, it’s episode number
407, if you’d like to listen to that one.
If you know nothing about Eton, it is
one of the most prestigious schools
in Britain, perhaps even in the world.
It’s the educational destination of
choice for the British royal family,
but also royals from all over the world,
as well as the British aristocracy.
Now, Simon Mann, by all accounts, wasn’t
a particularly diligent student, and
after finishing school, he went to the
Royal Military Academy of Sandhurst,
where British Army officers are trained.
Soldiering, it seemed, was a
profession that he was well-suited
to, and he eventually joined the
elite Special Air Service, or SAS.
Now the SAS is essentially the
British Special Forces, and is known
for its brutal selection process and
its highly specialised operations.
They’re the elite soldiers who are
flown in for particularly dangerous
or difficult missions, the seriously
hairy stuff, the stuff they can’t tell
their friends or family anything about.
This was Mann’s life for the best part
of 10 years, but in 1981, at the age
of 29, he decided enough was enough.
He left the forces and started
to look for new opportunities.
And this is where the
story gets a little murky.
Like many former special forces
operatives, Mann transitioned into the
world of private military contracting.
He became a mercenary, a gun for hire.
He saw conflict zones not as theatres
of war, but as business opportunities.
He co-founded a company called
Executive Outcomes with a former officer
in South Africa’s special forces.
And this company was essentially a
group of private soldiers who would
be sent into warzones, fighting on
behalf of whoever paid their invoices,
without asking too many questions
about where the money came from.
They were well-armed, well-trained,
and available to the highest bidder.
Now, here isn’t the time to go into
everything that they did, and of course,
a lot of it is still not publicly known,
but they made a name for themselves
first in Angola, and then in Sierra
Leone, supporting the government
forces against various rebel groups.
They were very effective, and
these contracts also turned
Simon Mann into a very rich man.
Along the way, he had become a key figure
in this new world of corporate warfare.
He was charming, well-connected,
and increasingly ambitious.
He began mixing with financiers, oil
executives, and political fixers.
And someone he got to know, as
they both ran in similar circles
in South Africa, was Mark Thatcher.
And yes, again, that is the
son of Margaret Thatcher.
Mark Thatcher had had a string of
failed business ventures and had
come under scrutiny for his apparent
exploitation of his mother’s position
for his own financial interests.
In other words, he was involved in all
sorts of slightly dubious and dodgy
business dealings, and had a reputation
in Britain for being up to no good.
Now, fast forward to 2003.
Simon Mann was contacted, he
says, by a wealthy Lebanese
businessman called Ely Calil.
Calil had made a fortune, hundreds
of millions of dollars, buying
and selling oil in West Africa.
Or to be precise, it’s a little
unclear exactly how he made his money,
but he claimed it was through oil.
Anyway, Calil called up Simon Mann
and told him to come immediately
to his grand mansion in Chelsea.
There was something he needed to tell him.
When Mann arrived, Calil told him about
an opportunity in Equatorial Guinea.
Now, as a brief bit of background,
Equatorial Guinea is a tiny country on
the west coast of Central Africa, with
a population of just over a million.
It is a former Spanish colony, but for
most of its post-independence history, it
has been ruled by one man: Teodoro Obiang.
For the first few years of independence,
the country remained poor and isolated.
But in the 1990s, everything changed.
Vast offshore oil reserves were
discovered, and suddenly, the
country was flush with cash.
By the early 2000s, it had one of the
highest GDPs per capita in Africa.
But, as you might expect, almost none of
that wealth reached the average citizen.
Most of it was controlled by the president
and his family, particularly his son,
Teodorín, who became infamous for his
luxury lifestyle: mansions, supercars,
private jets, all of the things you
might expect from the son of a dictator.
And Equatorial Guinea
was a one-party state.
Other parties were allowed in
theory, but not in practice.
Now, back to Ely Calil’s
Chelsea mansion in 2003.
Calil told Mann that he had been
contacted by someone called Severo
Moto, who was the exiled leader of
the opposition in Equatorial Guinea.
Moto had sought Calil’s help in financing
a coup to overthrow the ageing Obiang.
And Calil knew the man
to go to: Simon Mann.
Calil told Mann about the plot,
claiming—according to Mann—that
King Juan Carlos of Spain and the
then Spanish Prime Minister, José
María Aznar, both supported it.
Calil has denied his involvement, and
there’s no hard evidence confirming
Spanish backing, so it’s possible
Mann or Calil exaggerated this.
Still, the plan was attractive
enough for Mann to proceed.
Of course, neither Calil nor
Mann were doing this out of
the goodness of their hearts.
Mann would later say that he was attracted
by the adventure of the mission, and
thought that overthrowing a corrupt and
brutal dictator would surely be a good
thing for the people of Equatorial Guinea.
But more than this, it would be
a fabulous financial windfall.
Not only would he be paid handsomely
for pulling off the coup, but he and his
conspirators stood to gain oil and mining
rights once the coup had been completed.
Even just a tiny slice of
Equatorial Guinea’s oil wealth
would be worth billions.
It was, in essence, a business deal
disguised as a political revolution.
Now, where does Mark Thatcher come in?
Well, pulling off a military coup–paying
the mercenaries, chartering the
planes, getting the weapons and
all of that–it was expensive stuff.
Mann thought it would
cost around $2.5 million.
Small fry compared to the riches
that awaited them, but someone
needed to come up with the cash
to get the operation moving.
Calil, unfortunately, wasn’t
in a position to do this.
He might have had a Chelsea mansion
and a reported 9-digit fortune, but
the French authorities were in the
middle of a criminal investigation
into his business activities,
and had frozen his bank accounts.
Mann floated the idea to Mark Thatcher.
He could invest in the project, and
in return, he would have a stake in
the future profits of the operation.
Thatcher was in.
He was in charge of sourcing a
helicopter, which might seem like a
strange task, but he was a trained
helicopter pilot, so it did make sense.
Mann got to work, recruiting South African
mercenaries and planning the operation.
He would even later claim that
Margaret Thatcher herself–the former
British Prime Minister–knew and
approved of the plot, although this
was vigorously denied by Thatcher.
In any case, by early
2004, the plan was settled.
64 South African mercenaries would fly
from South Africa to Harare, in Zimbabwe.
There, they would pick up Mann and a
bunch of weapons: guns, grenade launchers,
explosives, and all of the sort of stuff
that you need to launch a military coup.
From there, the plane would
continue to Equatorial Guinea.
It would land, the men would jump out,
take control of the airport, then, in
conjunction with rebel troops who were
there waiting for them, they would storm
the presidential palace and arrest Obiang.
Moto would arrive and
declare himself president.
The entire mission would
last just a few hours.
It would be quick, clean,
and incredibly profitable.
But the operation was sloppy.
The mercenaries were too visible, the
paperwork was too vague, and what’s more,
the intelligence agencies were watching.
Zimbabwean authorities
had got wind of the plot.
Before the plane even touched
down at Harare airport, Mann
was detained and arrested.
He initially claimed that the weapons he
was found with were to provide security at
a diamond mine in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, but nobody was buying this.
What’s more, in Equatorial Guinea, the
authorities arrested a group of South
African and Angolan men who had been
sent as a vanguard, an advance party.
By March 9th, 2004, Mann and his
“on the ground” mercenaries were
behind bars, one batch in Zimbabwe
and the other in Equatorial Guinea.
President Obiang, you could say perfectly
reasonably, was not best pleased to
find out that there was this plot to
overthrow him, seemingly with the tacit
approval of various European governments.
He publicly stated that he would bring
Mann to Equatorial Guinea so that
he could, and I’m quoting directly,
“eat his testicles and then drag
his naked body through the streets.”
Now, whether that is a punishment Mann
deserved is a question of opinion.
Fortunately, it isn’t
what actually happened.
Mann was sentenced to prison, first
in Zimbabwe, before then being handed
over to Equatorial Guinea, where he was
sentenced to 34 years in the country’s
notorious “Black Beach Prison”.
Fortunately, President Obiang seemed
to have softened, and in 2009,
after Mann agreed to identify his
fellow conspirators, after serving
only one and a half years of his
34-year sentence, he was released.
As for the other conspirators,
nobody was particularly good
at covering their tracks.
In the immediate aftermath of this
attempted coup, there were documents found
that linked the operation to a network of
offshore companies, shell corporations,
and bank accounts in places like the
British Virgin Islands and Guernsey.
One of these was a letter from Simon
Mann to his wife, while he was still in
jail in Zimbabwe, awaiting sentencing.
This document named Ely Calil and Mark
Thatcher, and contained the now infamous
line “It may be that getting us out
comes down to a large splodge of wonga”.
Now, there’s some British slang
in there, so let me explain it.
Splodge means a large amount,
but it’s normally something
you’d use with something liquid
or runny, like paint or jam.
And “wonga” is slang for money.
So, to translate that into more regular
English, “it may be that to get us out of
jail, we need a large amount of money”.
Bribes, payments made to persuade
officials to look the other way or
make inconvenient problems, like
being caught trying to launch a
military coup, simply disappear.
Now, there is no evidence that
this large amount of money ever was
handed over, but this phrase was
pounced on by the British tabloids.
The coup became known by the press as the
Wonga coup, and, back home, Mark Thatcher
had some tough questions to answer.
He was accused of financing the operation
and was later arrested in South Africa.
He first claimed that he didn’t know
that the helicopter would be used for
a military coup, instead saying he
thought it was a humanitarian airlift,
but later admitted that it “might
be used for mercenary activity”.
Fortunately for him, he escaped
jail, but was given a large fine
and a four-year suspended sentence.
So what do we make of Simon
Mann and the Wonga Coup?
On one level, it’s an improbable
story of a failed mercenary adventure:
a group of former soldiers hoping
to get rich through regime change.
But on another level, it’s about the
murky intersections of business, politics,
and post-colonial power structures.
Yes, Obiang might have been an
egregiously corrupt dictator, but
does that in any way justify a bunch
of mercenaries overthrowing him?
As of the time of recording this
episode, Obiang is still in power,
and will shortly be turning 83.
His son, Teodorín, is still vice
president and will almost certainly
assume power when his father dies.
And Equatorial Guinea continues to be
one of the most unequal societies in the
world, despite its vast natural wealth.
As for Simon Mann, he died in May
this year, his mercenary past–so
he said–put well behind him.
But the legacy of the Wonga Coup remains.
It’s a cautionary tale about how
easily ambition can turn into
arrogance, and how the lines between
business, war, and politics are often
far blurrier than we like to think.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on Simon Mann, Mark
Thatcher and the Wonga coup.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
As a quick reminder, this was part
two of this three-part mini-series.
If you missed part one, that was on
Mobutu Sese Soko, the charismatic
and complicated leader of the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
And next up, in part three, we are going
to talk about the Angolan Model, and
how China’s interests in Africa compare
to those of Africa’s former colonisers.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.